# ITR: Adaptive Query Processing Architecture for Streaming Geospatial Image Data

This project developed models, techniques, and architectures for the
adaptive processing of real-time remotely sensed, strea
image data, in particular from the GOES satellite.

The project from 2003 to 2006, was a collaborative research effort
between the Department of Computer Science and the CalSpace Center of
Excellence at the University of California, Davis

The principal investigators were Michael Gertz (PI, Dept. of Computer
Science), Susan Ustin (Co-PI, Director of CalSpace Center of
Excellence, and Quinn Hart (Co-PI, Calspace and Dept. of Computer
Science).

The project was funded through an NSF ITR award
[http://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward.do?AwardNumber=0326517
#0326517].

The GeoStream query model and query processing framework extended
current models and technique for processing continuous, multi-user
queries on data streams to handle complex query frameworks on
geospatial data, including spatial selections and sensor-band
selections. Important operators on GeoStreams include sensor band
algebra, pixel neighborhood processing, spatial filtering,
aggregation, and spatial reference transformations.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) Geostationary
Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) data, directly accessible
in this project, served as the testbed for the proposed research. A
major application supported water balance applications, calculating
spatially distributed daily reference evapotranspiration maps for the
State of California at high spatial resolution (1 km2-16 km2), and in
real-time. The methodology will use GOES data, properly combined with
weather station data, and ancillary datasets such as digital elevation
maps.
